docs: Add a guide for deploying Redpanda in AKS (#1125)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/deploy/deployment-option/self-hosted/kubernetes/eks-guide.mdx

1. Go to **Topics** > **twitch_chat**.

  The message that you produced to the topic is displayed along with some other details about the topic.

## Configure external access to the Redpanda brokers

Because external clients are not in the Kubernetes cluster where the Redpanda brokers are running, they cannot resolve the internal addresses of the headless ClusterIP Service.
Instead, Redpanda brokers must also advertise an externally accessible adress that external clients can connect to.

The simplest option for development is to configure the Redpanda brokers to advertise the IP addresses of the worker nodes on which they are running, instead of the default `redpanda-<ordinal-number>.local` hostname.

:::note Only for development and testing
IP addresses can change. If the IP addresses of your LoadBalancer Services change, you must reconfigure the Redpanda brokers and all your external clients with the new IP addresses.
:::

:::tip
In production environments, it's best practice to use DNS. See [Configure External Access through a NodePort Service](../../../../../manage/kubernetes/networking/configure-external-access-nodeport).
:::

> 1. Add inbound firewall rules to your instances so that external traffic can reach each node port on all Kubernetes worker nodes in the cluster. See the [Amazon EC2 documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/authorizing-access-to-an-instance.html) for details.

Author: I'll make a note to revisit it.

---
title: Deploy a Redpanda Cluster in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Deploy a Redpanda Cluster in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Set up a three-broker Redpanda cluster in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)."/>
</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Versions from '../../../../shared/_versions.mdx'
import InstallRpkHomebrew from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-homebrew.mdx"
import InstallRpkLinux from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-linux.mdx"

Deploy a Redpanda cluster and Redpanda Console in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) using the Helm chart. Then, use rpk both as an internal client and an external client to interact with your Redpanda cluster from the command line.

## Prerequisites

> Before you begin, make sure that you have the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you begin, you must have the following:
```

      --cluster redpanda \
      --attach-policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AmazonEBSCSIDriverPolicy \
      --approve \
      --role-only \
      --role-name AmazonEKS_EBS_CSI_DriverRole
  ```

1. Get your AWS account ID:

  ```bash
  AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=`aws sts get-caller-identity | jq -r '.Account'`
  ```

1. Add the EBS CSI add-on:

  ```bash
  eksctl create addon \
      --name aws-ebs-csi-driver \
      --cluster redpanda \
      --service-account-role-arn arn:aws:iam::${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}:role/AmazonEKS_EBS_CSI_DriverRole \
      --force
  ```

## Deploy Redpanda

1. Install Redpanda using Helm:

  ```bash
  helm repo add redpanda https://charts.redpanda.com/
  helm repo update
  helm install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
    --namespace redpanda \
    --create-namespace
  ```

  The installation displays some tips for getting started.

1. Wait for the Redpanda cluster to be ready:

  ```bash
  kubectl -n redpanda rollout status statefulset redpanda --watch
  ```

  When the Redpanda cluster is ready, the output should look similar to the following:

  ```text
  statefulset rolling update complete 3 pods at revision redpanda-8654f645b4...
  ```

>   If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting).
```

  ```

  </details>

## Deploy Redpanda Console

Redpanda Console is a developer-friendly web UI for managing and debugging your Redpanda cluster and your applications.

Install Redpanda Console using Helm:

```bash
helm repo add redpanda 'https://charts.redpanda.com/'
helm repo update
helm install redpanda-console redpanda/console \
  --namespace redpanda \
  --create-namespace \
  --set console.config.kafka.brokers=redpanda-0.redpanda.redpanda.svc.cluster.local.:9093 \
  --set service.type=NodePort \
  --set service.targetPort=8080
```

- `--namespace redpanda`: Deploy Redpanda Console in the same namespace as your Redpanda cluster so that it can access the brokers using their internal FQDNs.
-  `--set console.config.kafka.brokers=redpanda-0.redpanda.redpanda.svc.cluster.local.:9093`: The Redpanda broker to which Redpanda Console connects to get information from the Redpanda cluster.
- `--set service.type=NodePort`: The Service that Redpanda Console should be exposed to. A NodePort Service allows you to access Redpanda Console from outside Kubernetes.
- `--set service.targetPort=8080` The port on which the Redpanda Console container expects traffic.

## Start streaming

> Each Redpanda broker comes with rpk, which is a CLI tool for connecting to and interacting with Redpanda brokers. You can use rpk inside one of the Redpanda broker's Docker containers to create a topic, produce messages to it, and consume messages from it.

Reviewer: link rpk to the rpk ref?

  export REDPANDA_BROKERS=203.0.113.3:31092,203.0.113.5:31092,203.0.113.7:31092
  ```

  :::note
  31092 is the Kafka API port that's exposed by the NodePort Service.
  :::

1. Get the cluster info:

  ```bash
  rpk cluster info
  ```

  <details>
  <summary>
  Example output
  </summary>

  ```text
  CLUSTER
  =======
  redpanda.ad4a2f55-f34e-4a7f-babd-01d392cf4e80

  BROKERS
  =======
  ID    HOST           PORT
  0     203.0.113.3    31092
  1*    203.0.113.5    31092
  2     203.0.113.7    31092
  ```

  </details>

## Troubleshooting

### StatefulSet never rolls out

If the StatefulSet Pods remain in a pending state, they may be waiting for resources to become available:

* Make sure that you have a default StorageClass available in your Kubernetes cluster and that the underlying volumes have at least 20Gi of storage capacity.

  ```bash
  kubectl get storageclass
  ```

* Make sure that you installed the [Amazon EBS CSI driver](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/ebs-csi.html). This driver is required to allow EKS to create PersistentVolumes.

### dig not defined

`Error: parse error at (redpanda/templates/statefulset.yaml:203): function "dig" not defined`

> If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [prerequisites](#prerequisites).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).
```

Reviewer: Marked because I thought it should map to the actual case of the heading rather than the cap rules for a sentence.
